# WOrkflow with uv package manager

All the workflow with uv are almost the same than with poetry, the concepts are the same, even the commands are almost the same.

SO if you want more explanations in concepts/commands, feel free to move on [Poetry workflow](/notes/workflow_with_poetry.md)

1) **Download uv via pip/pipx or natively:**
```
# pip
python -m pip install uv
```
**or** install it like a software on your Linux system:

```
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```
You can also install it with pipx which is globally the same than with curl:
```
pipx install uv
```
pipx is used to install Python CLI applications globally while still isolating them in virtual environments. pipx will manage upgrades and uninstalls.

So no need to install uv in an environment to access it via 'poetry' command.

2) **Initialize a project with a pyproject.toml**

```
uv init
```
- Your working directory becomes your uv project directory.
- a pyproject.toml is generated 

**Note:**
`pyproject.toml` is born from PEP 518. That's a standardized way to create Python packages.
So whether generated by Poetry or uv, It has the same shape:
```[project]
name = "python-development-good-practices"
version = "0.1.0"
description = "Add your description here"
readme = "README.md"
requires-python = ">=3.13"
dependencies = []
```
From this file, you can create a .lock file from any modern package/dependencies manager which can reproduce any project respecting PEP518.

3) **Add packages in our poetry environment**:

**Add packages by CLI**:

```
uv add pyfiglet
```
**Result:**: 
- It creates a .venv based on your system Python (depends on the Python you pinned globally in uv config)
- It adds the package to pyproject.toml
- It updates or creates a uv.lock
- It creates a .python-version which sets the python interpreter version for this project(Poetry doesn't have this)

**Modify manually the pyproject.toml**

Add a package  in your `dependencies=[]` parameter in your .toml:
```
dependencies = [
    "pyfiglet (>=1.0.4,<2.0.0)",
    "pandas",
]
```
Run:
```
uv lock
```
**Result:** 
- It will synchronize the .toml which is source of truth with your .lock file

Then:
```
uv sync
```
**Result:**
- It installs new synchronized packages

4) **Remove packages in our poetry environment**:

**Remove packages by CLI**:

```
uv remove pandas
```
**Result:**: 
- Removes `pandas` from venv
- Updates the .toml & the .lock

**Modify manually the pyproject.toml**

Remove a package  in your `dependencies=[]` parameter in your .toml:
```
dependencies = [
    "pyfiglet (>=1.0.4,<2.0.0)",
]
```
Run:
```
uv lock
```
**Result:** 
- It will synchronize the .toml which is source of truth with your .lock file

Then:
```
uv sync
```
**Result:**
- It uninstalls packages from venv that aren't in the updated .lock file

5) **Activate/Deactivate the .venv environment from your Poetry:**

From your Linux shell to activate your local environment:
```
source .venv/bin/activate
```
**Result:**
- Poetry is going to activate the .venv created by an "add" or "venv" command.

For deactivating it:
```
deactivate
```

### Manage dependencies 

uv is built with the pyproject.toml & .lock system.

So the feature to cut the dependencies in multiple groups like dev, pre-production, production,lint is included in the template of the pyproject.toml.

```
uv add --group lint ruff
```
**Result:**
Adds `ruff` to the "lint" group dependency 

```
uv sync --group docs
```
**Result**:
Imagine that your project contains three categories of dependencies in your pyproject.toml:

- Production dependencies (by default).

- A ‘dev’ group (for tests and linters).

- A ‘docs’ group (for generating documentation).

This command will sync the .toml and .lock on the base of the two first(prod+dev) then the docs whereas:
```
uv sync --only-group docs
```
Only docs group will be concerned

#### uv In production with Docker

Often we use the combo:
```
uv sync --no-dev --locked
```
To use our app in a dockerized environment because:
- `--nodev` syncs only the production group dependencies
- `--locked` if you run a simple 'uv sync' and you have accidentally modified your pyproject.toml file (or if a dependency rule is unclear), uv will attempt to resolve the dependencies and will update the uv.lock file if it deems it necessary.

In production, you definitely do not want the build tool to take any initiative, so we define the --locked flag.



### The uv singularity

COmpared to Poetry, uv is able to manage Python versions on the system even if it's installed by another tool.
On this point, it looks like a pyenv feature except that uv is synchronized with several repos.

Besides **uv** is highly configurable, you can choose to pin a version of Python from your system, from a repo, download this Python-version or not.

**Some main python features for your uv journey:**

```
uv python list
```
**Output**:
Lists all available python versions through repos and those which are on your system

**Then you can choose one one of these versions to build a venv with it:**
```
uv venv --python 3.13.13
```
To specify the version, The following Python version request formats are supported:

```
<version> (e.g., 3, 3.12, 3.12.3)
<version-specifier> (e.g., >=3.12,<3.13)
<version><short-variant> (e.g., 3.13t, 3.12.0d)
<version>+<variant> (e.g., 3.13+freethreaded, 3.12.0+debug, 3.14+gil)
<implementation> (e.g., cpython or cp)
<implementation>@<version> (e.g., cpython@3.12)
<implementation><version> (e.g., cpython3.12 or cp312)
<implementation><version-specifier> (e.g., cpython>=3.12,<3.13)
<implementation>-<version>-<os>-<arch>-<libc> (e.g., cpython-3.12.3-macos-aarch64-none)
```
you can pin a version to define a value by default for your venv when a `add` or `venv` command is run:

```
uv python pin 3.13.13 --global
```

**Result:** uv is smart enough to choose a version which exists on your system

**Note**: Contrary to poetry, **uv** has a .python-version which is a pyenv feature.

**Basic workflow**:

The developer clones the project and immediately types ‘uv sync’. ‘uv’ reads the .python-version file (which specifies version 3.13), detects that this version is not installed on the machine, automatically downloads it in the background, creates the .venv environment for version 3.13, and installs the dependencies. The developer did not have to install anything manually.

**Powerful !!!**

### Rua apps in a uv environment

Place you in your working directory and run:

```
uv run python sign_printer/sign_printer.py hello
```

or

```
uv run sign_printer/sign_printer.py hello
```
Uv is enough smart to find the Python of your environment with a simple .py file
```
                   ><< ><<          
><<                ><< ><<          
><<        ><<     ><< ><<   ><<    
>< ><    ><   ><<  ><< ><< ><<  ><< 
><<  ><<><<<<< ><< ><< ><<><<    ><<
><   ><<><         ><< ><< ><<  ><< 
><<  ><<  ><<<<   ><<<><<<   ><<   
```
**transition**:

Now we know that we can count on 2 dependency management tools for production, we're going to interest about some automation tools in [v6](https://github.com/DataScienceMyLove/python_development_good_practices/tree/v6) that we can add to our app workflow

